# Lifting state

## 📝 Your Notes

Lifting the state means managing the state for two sibling componenets in their lowest common parent, and then passing that state as well as state updater functions down from the parent to the children.

These child components are then called "Controlled Componenets".

There should be a single "source of truth" for any data that changes in a React application (top down data flow).

Lifting state involves more "boilerplate" code than two-way binding approaches, but it takes less work to find and isolate bugs.

If something can be derived/computed from either props or state , it probably shouldn't be in the state. For example, we don't need to store celsis temp AND farenheight temp, we just need to store the temperature and the scale, and have conversion methods.

### Co-locating state

Co-locating state is simply the opposite of lifting state. Many developers forget to do this when the requirements change and the state no longer needs to be in the parent component. This is a problem for maintainability, and also performance, because changing state in the parent means the entire React tree is invalidated and React needs to check all the child components to see if anything has changed. If you have slow children components, this is particularly costly.

This happens in the "real world" when developers put things in the global Redux store, or in a global context, that doesn't really need to be global.

#### The principle of colocation: Place code as close to where it's relevant as possible.

It's important to regularly co-locate as part of your refactoring/maintenance process.Lifting state happens naturally because not doing it will break your app, but you need to REMEMBER to co-locate state.

*The principle of co-location is important in many other areas: CSS, Code Comments, Unit Tests, etc. See https://kentcdodds.com/blog/colocation*







## Background

A common question from React beginners is how to share state between two sibling
components. The answer is to
["lift the state"](https://reactjs.org/docs/lifting-state-up.html) which
basically amounts to finding the lowest common parent shared between the two
components and placing the state management there, and then passing the state
and a mechanism for updating that state down into the components that need it.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/03.js)
- [Final](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/03.js)

👨‍💼 Peter told us we've got a new feature request for the `Display` component. He
wants us to display the `animal` the user selects. But that state is managed in
a "sibling" component, so we have to move that management to the least common
parent (`App`) and then pass it down.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 colocating state

[Production deploy](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/03.extra-1.js)

As a community we’re pretty good at lifting state. It becomes natural over time.
One thing that we typically have trouble remembering to do is to push state back
down (or
[colocate state](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/state-colocation-will-make-your-react-app-faster)).

👨‍💼 Peter told us that now users only want the animal displayed instead of the
name:

```javascript
function Display({animal}) {
  return <div>{`Your favorite animal is: ${animal}!`}</div>
}
```

You'll notice that just updating the `Display` component to this works fine, but
for the extra credit, go through the process of moving state to the components
that need it. You know what you just did for the `Animal` component? You need to
do the opposite thing for the `Name` component.

## 🦉 Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=03%3A%20Lifting%20state&em=whitleyblaine%40protonmail.com).
