# useRef and useEffect: DOM interaction

## ðŸ“ Your Notes

JSX is syntactic sugar for React.createElement -- therefore, you don't actually have access to DOM nodes in your function component.
The DOM nodes aren't created until ReactDOM.render is called
Your function component simply creates and returns React Elements and has nothing to do with the DOM

For this reason, if you want access to the DOM, you need to ask React to give you access to a DOM node when it renders your component.
This happens through a special prop called `ref`

Simple example:
```javascript
function MyDiv(){
  const myDivRef = React.useRef();
  React.useEffect(()=>{
    const myDiv = myDivRef.current;
    // myDiv is the div DOM node!
    console.log(myDiv);
  }, [])
  return <div ref={myDivRef}>hi</div>
}
```

useEffect runs after every render (mount AND update). If you only want to run an effect once, on mount, and then clean it up on unmount, you can pass an empty array of dependencies. This will tell React it doesn't depend on anything, which is very different from not passing dependencies, which tells React that it depends on EVERYTHING.

Because useEffect runs AFTER every render, by the time it runs, myDivRef.current will be set to the DOM node.

Unlike componentDidMount or componentDidUpdate, effects scheduled with useEffect don't block the browser from updating the screen. This makes your app feel more responsive. In the uncommon case that an effect needs to happen synchronously, such as measuring the layout, there is a separate useLayoutEffect Hook. 




## Background

Often when working with React you'll need to integrate with UI libraries. Some
of these need to work directly with the DOM. Remember that when you do:
`<div>hi</div>` that's actually syntactic sugar for a `React.createElement` so
you don't actually have access to DOM nodes in your function component. In fact,
DOM nodes aren't created at all until the `ReactDOM.render` method is called.
Your function component is really just responsible for creating and returning
React Elements and has nothing to do with the DOM in particular.

So to get access to the DOM, you need to ask React to give you access to a
particular DOM node when it renders your component. The way this happens is
through a special prop called `ref`.

Here's a simple example of using the `ref` prop:

```javascript
function MyDiv() {
  const myDivRef = React.useRef()
  React.useEffect(() => {
    const myDiv = myDivRef.current
    // myDiv is the div DOM node!
    console.log(myDiv)
  }, [])
  return <div ref={myDivRef}>hi</div>
}
```

After the component has been rendered, it's considered "mounted." That's when
the React.useEffect callback is called and so by that point, the ref should have
its `current` property set to the DOM node. So often you'll do direct DOM
interactions/manipulations in the `useEffect` callback.

## Exercise

Production deploys:

- [Exercise](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/exercise/05.js)
- [Final](https://react-hooks.netlify.app/isolated/final/05.js)

In this exercise we're going to make a `<Tilt />` component that renders a div
and uses the `vanilla-tilt` library to make it super fancy.

The thing is, `vanilla-tilt` works directly with DOM nodes to setup event
handlers and stuff, so we need access to the DOM node. But because we're not the
one calling `document.createElement` (React does) we need React to give it to
us.

So in this exercise we're going to use a `ref` so React can give us the DOM node
and then we can pass that on to `vanilla-tilt`.

Additionally, we'll need to clean up after ourselves if this component is
unmounted. Otherwise we'll have event handlers dangling around on DOM nodes that
are no longer in the document.

### Alternate:

If you'd prefer to practice refactoring a class that does this to a hook, then
you can open `src/exercise/05-classes.js` and open that on
[an isolated page](http://localhost:3000/isolated/exercise/05-classes.js) to
practice that.

## ðŸ¦‰ Feedback

Fill out
[the feedback form](https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=React%20Hooks%20%F0%9F%8E%A3&e=05%3A%20useRef%20and%20useEffect%3A%20DOM%20interaction&em=whitleyblaine%40protonmail.com).
